[Music]
arrays in awk are very similar to those
in the
shell environment that
they can be associative arrays with the
index not necessarily an integer
and they also use sparse storage that
means that
when you have
indices like 1 2 and then 100 it doesn't
mean that the remaining elements with
indices in between need to be stored or
allocated from
and the index need not be an integer
either
so these are basically hashes by default
the three commands shown on the slide
show you how to how to assign a value to
an array
how to run through all the indices of an
array and then how to delete an element
from an array we also have lot of
loops in awk language
there are two types of for loops the one
running through the
indices of all
the elements of an array
and then
a for loop that looks like
c language and then there is an if loop
a while loop
with both
the condition coming before the loop r
after the loop
so let us put these loops and arrays to
some example usage to illustrate how to
use awk for processing information
hidden in a text file so here is an
example input of
text where there are some
role numbers and
integers indicating the fees paid by the
respective
student some lines have these
numbers
which look like roll numbers and then a
number after that indicating the amount
of fees paid and then there are some
comments that come intermediately so
there may be a comment that occupies the
entire line or part of a line
and there is no specific format for the
comment so here is a text that is quite
difficult to process through
okay now we will see how to make
good use of awk to
find out the amount of fees paid by all
the students
and also to list students who have paid
fees less than a particular threshold
amount so an example sle want to just
see how to process
fields that are mixed up with the text
in a input
stream the code that
does the action for us
is here
so the begin block
would basically start off
initializing the variable for total fees
and also
indicating the default field separator
as blank
code block does not have any pattern
which means it will run on every line
and what it does is it will check
whether
the first field happens to be like a
roll number so you can see that there is
a alphabetical character coming twice
and then
there is a digit that is coming twice
and then there is another alphabetical
character
and then there is a digit that comes
three times so which means that we are
looking at
something that
is like a roll number here
and if it happens to match then the code
is getting executed
and we assign that particular string to
the roll number and the second field
that comes immediately after must be the
fee is paid
and then we are populating an array
called rf roll numbers and fees
where the roll number is used as the
index which is not a
integer but it's a string
and then the fees is the value stored
and then we are also adding the fees to
the total fees so that we can calculate
the average later on
and we are also printing out the roll
number and how much fees is paid as
a log entry for us
while the processing of every line is
happening
once the entire input stream has been
processed the end block will come into
the picture where we define what is the
cutoff
for the fees
and then we look at how many students
have paid less than that using
this loop
where we are running through all the
elements of the array rf
and then counting the number of such
students and if it is less than
if the fees paid by the student is less
than the cut we print a message out
so what we are learning in the script is
how to use a fairly complex regular
expression to check for a roll number
and then assigning the
fields that are
detected in that particular record
populating an array with
some numbers
arithmetic operations
a for loop
and also a net loop
let us see it in action now
so this is the input and
i would now execute
the output on it and now you can see
that
those lines which contain the roll
number and the fees are detected
correctly and we are now giving a fairly
good report clean report on the list of
students and the fees paid so we are
able to extract useful information from
a car buildup input file and then we are
also doing the check
where we are also mentioning the
threshold so there are two students who
have paid less than the threshold of 21
500 and then we are listing them and we
are also reporting the average fees paid
or the total piece paid so this is just
a very silly example but it tells you
how you can
combine the regular expressions
and arithmetic operations along with the
awk capability of processing line by
line to perform some operation on an
input stream now this input stream can
be any long awk being a programming
language you could have your own
functions defined
and you could keep them either in a
separate file to act as a library for
you or you could also include them in
the script that you are executing
so here is an example command where the
in file contains some lines which
are then
sent to the pipe to awk awk is invoked
with
minus f option twice once for the
library and once for the script
and here are the two files
to show you some simple functions that
you could actually use for the script so
we have one function in which we don't
have any argument that is specified
which is passed on to the function
another function where an argument is
passed
and the script itself does a simple
operation where you
calculate
some value like
multiplying with random number and then
printing it out so you could call the
functions in this manner you could call
functions
or
functions which written a particular
value you can assign them to a variable
so we can just look at an example to try
the concept of functions now so the
function library that we have has two
functions
and they do very simple operation the
first one
does just twice of the first argument
that is passed from
the input stream
printing it out as a floating number the
second function
what it does is just simply take a sign
of that particular argument and print it
out now what we are doing here is we are
adding 0 to the input parameter so that
it gets converted to a number
automatically
and the function itself is here
in the begin we have the block showing
you mathematical function being done
and then in the
action block we are executing the two
functions once we are just using it as a
procedure and the second time we are
using it to return a particular value
assigning it to b and printing it out
and in the end block we are also then
calling that function second time so it
means that
we are illustrating how to
call functions
whether we are in the begin block or
action block or in the end block so we
can run this particular
code with any input file and i want to
illustrate also how to run it
using
echo so i would like to send a value
like 12.5 to this particular script
and here what i am doing is that i am
calling the two files one for the
library and one for the script
in this manner
so that the library is also processed by
the awk before the
action blocks are processed
from the file func example dot awk and
the input stream contains just one line
which is basically
a number 12.5 as the only thing on the
record
so you see that it does that action the
c value is printed by the begin block
you can see that it is
tan inverse of one basically
and in radians and then
the action block is running for the
value 12.5 so
the 12.5 number is printed here
and then we are printing
uh twice of that coming from the myfunk
and then we are also printing
the sign of it
from the myfunk 2. so both are shown
here
and in the last function
we are actually also taking one more
call for the myfunc 2
with the value that is
calculated in the begin block so you can
see that the values that are initiated
in different blocks are available for
other blocks that come after that so all
of these are illustrated
and you could also run this without any
input line also so i just pass an empty
line and you could see that the begin
and the end blocks work quite nicely
and the action block does has nothing to
do because there is null and therefore
the value that is passed is zero so
according to the output also doesn't
make sense
you could also touch an empty file
and see that confirm that it's an empty
file
and you could
cat
the empty file
to this particular command and see what
happens
and you see that the action block
doesn't have anything at all because
there is nothing in the file
there is no
invocation of the action block so unlike
here for example where there is a null
that is passed
here there is nothing that is passed so
basically the action block has not been
not been invoked even once so here are
some more tips to make the best use of
the programming capability of awk so you
can do pretty printing in awk similar to
in the c language
so you have got the percentage
modifiers available to print
different types of
variables you have got codes for the
ascii character integers
and then floating point numbers in
scientific notation or in floating
notation
or whichever is shorter
and also for octal or hexadecimal values
that you want to print on the
screen
and of course the string is always
available you could also control the
width and precision for the numbers that
are being
printed out so you can make the
printing quite professional
using the awk language
you can combine the bash scripts and aux
scripts
so that your amount of programming
required from the user side is less
so you can use the best of both to
accomplish some task we will have that
illustrated shortly
there is also the here doc feature of
bash which can be used to write the aux
scripts within the bash script itself
sometimes you may want to combine
awk along with
other commands on the shell using pipe
so that
the final objective that you want can be
accomplished in a minimal effort rather
than having to write all of it in a
specific language
you must pick those tools in linux
or bash scripting or aux scripting as
minimally required
to achieve the task that you have set
forth now to illustrate the capabilities
of awk let us use awk like a
language for mathematical operations
and i want to generate a bunch of
numbers
and perform some simple operations but i
want to see how fast ark would do that
so i have some sample scripts to try
that out so i have a script
which is to create a file so you here
you can see
that i have my code only in the begin
block i have nothing in the
action block so what am i doing i am
creating
2 million records you can see that the
loop is going from
until nl which is 2 million
and what am i doing i am
basically checking how many columns of
data i want
and for those many columns i am printing
a floating point number which is taken
from the random function
so essentially i am creating two columns
of two million
rows of random numbers okay this is just
to create an input file
to see how spreadsheet
calculations can be done using awk and
the speed of it
okay and here i have in the end block a
comment to check whether
we can see how many lines have been
processed
so
i will just illustrate that now
by editing it
to process only a small number of files
so i will process for three columns okay
so i want to have 10 rows and three
columns of random numbers followed by a
line that reports to me how many columns
of random numbers have been created okay
so
now to execute this i need to pass some
input stream and because my action block
doesn't have anything it doesn't really
matter what i pass as the
input stream so i would just simply have
a
blank that is passed on
and then i invoke
the awk file which would basically run
only the begin because there's nothing
much to process in the
input stream so you can see now that
there are 10 lines of three rows of
random numbers followed by the
line which reports how many
lines and columns have been created so i
now go
and
make it 2 million because
we wanted to check
how long it would take
and instead of
3 columns i will have two columns and i
would like to comment this because i
don't need to check that out now
okay so we can now do this again
and this time what i would do is
i would like to time this particular
routine
and i would like to input the empty file
xaa that we gave
and the output i would like to give
to a data file you can watch that it
would finish the processing within a
very short time so it just took 3.2
seconds to create the output file now
how big is this output file
so you can see that it's about 38 mb
human readable fashion you can see about
37 megabytes of data has been created in
just three seconds and how many lines
are there in that
so 2 million lines are there and look at
those lines the first 10 lines i would
like to see now
so those are the random numbers and i
also can look at the last 10 lines so
you can see that there are two
columns of random numbers about 2
million data have been stored now i
would like to process these numbers to
create two more rows after that which
would have the product and sum of those
two numbers respectively so for that we
have a code and i would show you that
code now
so here the code is very simple
what we are doing is we are creating two
variables a and b which are the product
and sum and then we are printing the
four variables one after other which
would be like four columns because the
output field separator is also a blank
space okay so let us do this
and this will be processed
on the file rc type and data.txt
now when this is running you know that
the output will contain the four rows of
data running into two million data and
therefore we would like to have that
stored separately so processed data i
would like to store it separately and i
would also like to time this to see how
long it takes for awk to run through 2
million data
take product take sum
and then write them together as another
sheet
you see that the process is over within
just four and a half seconds slightly
more than creating the first sheet but
four and a half seconds for processing
two million records is i would say
pretty good let us look at the processed
data
so wc minus l
r sheet
pdata.txt and you see that there are two
million records
and head
of this
you can see that there are four rows of
the data as expected
and tail also
okay and ls minus lh
and you can see that the output data now
has has 69 megabytes of data because you
have got four so you can see that
a long
list of data can be processed to do some
operations like summation or product etc
using the mathematical operators also if
you like but the speed at which it is
able to do is quite impressive two
million records
processed
within just four and a half seconds to
create the output format which contains
a double number of columns now let us
see if this is possible
using any spreadsheet
so for that what i would do
is i would open
labor office calc which is like a
spreadsheet so those of you who
have
used microsoft excel will remember it's
a very similar kind of a program so i
would open the processed data
the input data i would like to open here
and it's now trying to read the data and
it has found that there is a space so it
has put those things in
some columns so i would like to indicate
the separator here as space so that it
will be in two columns
and then
accept it so it is trying to read the
file now and then there is an error you
can see that the data could not be
loaded completely because the maximum
number of rows per sheet was exceeded
and
now you can go to the bottom of the
file and you can see that roughly about
1 million data points only could be
stored
or could be loaded and the remaining
could not be loaded so now to create
the rest of the columns using operations
etc would be definitely much more time
consuming and seem complete so you can
see that working with a
spreadsheet on large number of rows is
of no good because it can't even open
more than a million records but we just
finished the entire task using just a
very small script you can see that here
so a small script
using awk
and also were able to run it in a very
short time just four and a half seconds
for two million records so i hope you
are impressed by the ability of awk to
process a lot of data very quickly and
will try to use it in some of your own
work
now let us come to some real life
example so if you are running a web
server then most probably it would be
apache and there will be a log book kept
for every
connection that comes to the apache web
server and the log book is a very
important place for system
administrators to look at because it
would contain information that would
help you in securing your web server or
to perform analytics to make the web
service little bit better for the
intended users and so on so what is the
typical format of the log entries from
apache
how to process that very quickly using
awk is something that i will illustrate
now so i have downloaded the
log book of a web server which i
maintain semantic.itm.ac dot in and
it has given me data of about 77
megabytes it's only for last
few weeks of data and how does it look
like so let me look at the first five
lines
of this file
and you can see that the log book would
contain
an ip address from where the connection
came
and then it would contain the
date and time stamp including the time
zone from
at what point of time the connection was
made
and the
client would have asked for a particular
site so what is the
site it was asking for
and then what was the user agent on the
other end
including the operator system on which
it is running okay so you could see that
here this is the ip address this is when
the connection was made and this
particular ip address was asking for a
file which is given with this url and
the protocol also has been mentioned so
let us say this information we would
like to extract
all the ip addresses which connected our
web server in the last five days for
example so it is a very useful
information we want to know whether
certain ip address has been connecting
rather too often in which case we would
like to probe further so it's a very
typical system administration task
how do we go about in extracting this
information so we can use one line
commands already so let us do that with
respect to this
to make the illustration i am creating
some smaller files so what i would do is
i will take head
access hyphen full dot log and i will
copy to access head dot log
and i would also
take the last
five lines now last 10 lines and store
it in another file so that there are
smaller files to work with
okay
so you can see that there are only
you know
10 rows
of about 1.3 kilobytes for me to process
for illustration but we will also run it
on the full file so the first command is
to extract all the ip addresses so let
us do that now
awk
and in single quotes
we have the field separator given as
blank
and then the action block without any
pattern in front of it where we would
like to print the
first field
then close
and this we will be running on
access head dot log
so
here is a code i am just setting the
field separator to be a blank and then
using that as the field separator the
first record
the first field of the record has to be
printed so you can see that the ip
addresses alone are being taken out of
the
file
now we could also do it for the other
okay so you have the information coming
out now we would like to let us say take
the date alone out and see okay so this
can be also obtained because we have the
space that is separating so one
two three four so the fourth column
would be the date okay so let us try
that out
okay and now you see that the date has
come with other information also
and we would like to make it a bit more
cleaner so what we would do is d is
equal to
substring
of
the fourth argument and i would like to
go from the second one
and calculate how many 3
7 8 9 10 11. so up to 11 characters i
would like to take
and then print the d
okay d is now the date string coming out
of that particular field so i am taking
a substring and printing it
and you can now see that it is printing
only part of it which is very neat
because this is the
date on which that particular that
particular ip address has contacted us
so now we can combine these two
to do the following
on which date
which i p address has connected us
okay so now we have got a processed data
and we could run this also on the
other file which is
a little earlier so 14th of january so
couple of weeks of data we have
now let us say we want to now run it
through the entire file so it would be
quite long
okay and let us also time it out
okay and this output i would like to
store it in another file so that we can
look at it instead of scrolling on the
screen so i would say date
hyphen ip.text
so now it has gone through the entire
file and finished it in 0.38 seconds so
that's very fast now how big is my
access log you can also see
ls minus l
access full dot log it's about
megabytes you could also see how many
lines are there
so you can see that about half a million
so half a million lines of text have
been processed to extract
two fields from it within just
0.38 seconds so that shows the power of
awk language in processing the textual
information splitting into fields and
extracting the fields that you are
interested including substrings
now let us make statistics out of this
so that we will find out
which day
how many
connections have been made
for that
if i want to have the statistics for the
last five days i need the date string
for the last five days
now last five days would have a very
different date depending upon the leap
year
or if we are in the first couple of days
of a month etcetera so i do not want to
go around calculating
what would be the date string let us say
from today two days back or three days
back so this work was already done in a
linux tool called date command so we
will use the date command itself to
extract the date string for two days
back three days back etc so let us look
at that now
so here we are printing the date five
days ago
so today's date is 28 january 5 days ago
23 january so we are able to print
n days ago by just simply using the date
command so let us say two days ago
let us say
three days ago etcetera so that means
that we can use the date command itself
to look at what are the date strings for
which i need to pick up the information
and we will use that as a part of the
script to extract statistics of website
usage
web server usage
as per the log book of the apache so let
us look at the script now
so the script file is here
in the begin block
what we are doing is we are
creating the date format for printing
for n days that is five days we can
change that to three days for example
for n days we are actually creating the
date string and we are collating it here
so please secret look at the
construction here the command string
pipe get line and then the variable name
will fetch the output of the command
into the variable called mydate and then
we are assigning that my date string to
the array called dates
and then here
we are actually collating all the date
strings so that we have one string that
contains all the dates for which i want
to have the statistics
and in the action block
what i am doing is i am extracting the
date
and checking whether the date of the
entry matches
any part of the date string that i have
constructed and if it matches it means
it is within the last five days and then
i print
that particular entry and i also note
down the
ip address
in a array and increase the count so
that i also keep track of the statistics
of the ip addresses which which
contacted our web server
and in the end what we are doing is we
are
printing out some statistics
of the
ip addresses which have contacted our
web server the maximum number of times
so let us run this script
on the
access
head dot log so that it's a smaller
output
so let us run this script on
access head dot log which will be a
smaller output for us to look at and you
can see that we are creating the date
stream which contains all the dates for
the last five days
and then the date and the ipads are
contacted and then the statistics so it
turns out that this particular ip
address contact to the web server once
and this address contacted to the web
server nine times in the last five days
so i will go ahead and
edit the script to change the number of
days from five to four
and look at the output and you can see
that the day string is now different it
goes up to 25 jan whereas in the
previous run it went up to 24 jan so
number of days for which i want to look
at the law can be controlled and once a
date string is available i am able to
use it also to look at the log entries
and then i am getting the statistics out
so what we will do is we will actually
run this on the entire
apache log
okay and for the four days i am getting
the statistics
and i will
store that in a file called stats
and i would also like to time it so that
about half a million entries i want to
check how long it takes to do the
statistics
and you see that in 0.6 seconds it's all
done and let us look at the stats
and you can see that the stats are
available here
and we have got a very big file 125 000
lines of file in which the statistics
are at the bottom
and
the
one by one entries are also listed okay
so
such a large file has been created by
processing half a million records in
less than
one second by awk
performing a fairly useful action of
finding out which ip address has
contacts the web server on
last four days
okay now what i will do i will edit this
script to output only the statistics for
me
so
i have the edited script here so in
which case what i am doing here is i am
avoiding the printing of the
dates that are processed i am just
storing the statistics okay so just
statistics i wanted to store
and then
printing them out
okay so let us run this now
1a okay
and i'm running it
to store the statistics in the file
okay this time also it runs quite fast
and like let us look at the stats.txt
file and you can see that it is only 185
lines because i am not storing the
actual lines that are processed but i am
only storing the statistics here are the
statistics now you can see that this
file
i can remove the first two lines
and i can cat stats dot text and sort
by the
first
field in a numerical fashion
so that i can find out which ip address
has access to our web server the maximum
number of times
so here you can see that there are some
ip addresses which are a bit suspicious
because they are contacting our web
server
you know tens of thousands of times so
which is something suspicious so we must
go and find out who are these so for
that there is a command called dig
so dig is a command to look up the dns
so to find out the name of the
particular server given the ip address
also using the minus x option so big
minus x
and then i can give the
ip address and it will tell me
that
this particular ip address actually is
coming from amazon api aws so it is one
of the virtual machines running using
the ec2 instance on amazon aws so
somebody is running a virtual machine in
the cloud and is
asking very frequently stuff from our
web server now we can do the same thing
with the other ip addresses
to check where they are from okay so
quite common these days that many of
these
activities are coming from public cloud
now we don't want all these comments
from the dig output so we may actually
trim it out we can make the output a
little bit slimmer by using the options
like plus no all plus answer minus x
then the ip address so you'll get only
one line which is helpful in making a
series of such requests so now this is
what i have decided to integrate with my
script so that
all those who have contacted the web
server i also want to know what are the
machines from where they have come ok
because ip address is difficult to find
out but names are slightly easier to
look at so i have created the next
script
which is the version 2 in which
everything else is same only thing is
that here
we are running another statistics what
we are doing here is we are creating a
command string where we are running the
dig command with the ip address and
getting the ip info and printing it out
so we are actually printing both the
statistics as well as the ip info as
output and here i would like to suppress
the printing of the lines so that the
output is a bit less
so let me do that
okay
so now we are ready to run
this okay and we run it on
the full
log
and
new stats file i will create
and i also want to time it okay so what
are we doing we are timing a script
which would run on the entire apache
access log and produce the output in the
form of statistics which are stored in a
file called nstats.txt okay so
let it run
and of course now for each of the
statistics it is a performing the dig
query so it takes time
and the dick query is then given the
output which is also stored along with
the entry okay so depending upon the
speed of the dns server within the
access for you this can take quite long
you can try it on a smaller log entry so
that it's a bit faster for you
so we are done with the script it took
about a minute okay 59 seconds it took
about a minute to perform a half a
million records
get statistics and on each ip address
running a dick command to get the name
and then putting it out in a file so let
us look at the n stats file
and see the statistics are very valuable
so wherever the information is not
available you have the blank but
otherwise you can see who are all the
machines which are all the machines that
are asking information from us and here
you can see that
three times
it is a census scanner.com
once it is
statcoid.com and so on
okay so you can see who is actually
accessing our web server and how many
times by looking at machines that have
contacted our server rather
large number of times we can go on to
see whether we need to do any more
protection of our server
okay and you can already notice that
there are some servers from russia
from brazil
and google bot which does the
scanning of all the web servers and
their
links to do the indexing operation
and also some
sites which are coming from the china
you can see the domain name there
and slightly unexpected domain names
also so you can see that
by looking at the
statistics
of your apache server
you can compare this particular output
with let us say
the log book like this
so this kind of a log entry may not be
very easy but now you understand that
you can actually do some statistics and
you can convert this particular ip
address to the name and thereby get an
alert on
whether or not you are expecting so many
hits from that particular site etc and
you can be
productive in keeping your web server
well maintained by performing these
statistics
every now and then and doing the
necessary actions on your
site
awk is able to do
these kind of operations rather fast as
you have already witnessed using the
timing of the scripts that we have
written and some of the scripts are not
very big so for example the website
statistics script is like this
so it's just a only few lines
just 34 lines so you can see that the
aux scripts need not be very long just a
few tens of lines and you can perform a
fairly complex kind of operation on
large amount of text and quite fast so i
hope you like the
awk language
the way it was exposed to you till now
so i want to also uh stress upon the
fact that awk is available everywhere
that is it is available for all
platforms and it is automatically
bundled for linux operating systems of
all flavors
and awk is a full-fledged programming
language it is very quick to code and it
is also fast in execution
so you can combine it on the command
line with other shell scripts so that
you can achieve the task that is at your
hand
quite quickly
and do explore this language by actually
writing out
small codes
to do things that you have already
learned to do in other languages
and find out how
quick and elegant the op code can be
you